https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ACM-29169--new console procedures, concept added (#8609)
open-cluster-management/rhacm-docs: secure_clusters/fine_grain_rbac_ui.adoc

[#fine-grain-rbac-ui]
= Assigning fine-grained role-based access control in the console

Assign fine-grained virtualization roles to users and groups directly from the console. This allows you to grant specific permissions to manage virtual machines at the cluster or namespace level.

*Required access:* Cluster administrator

.Prerequisites

See the following requirements to begin using fine-grained role-based access control:

- Enable the fg (add link- )
- Be familiar with the roles and permissions that are available in the system. For more information, see xref:../secure_clusters/(add link)

.Procedure

Complete the following steps to assign a role to a user or group:

> 

Author: New draft will build like this, adding steps to each section.

Reviewer: ### Understanding Granularity: Cluster vs. Project Role Assignments

Before creating a role assignment, it is important to understand how permissions are scoped across your fleet. A **Cluster role assignment** or **Cluster set role assignment** grants the specified identity access to *all* namespaces within the targeted clusters or cluster sets. This wide scope is ideal for cluster administrators or infrastructure operators. Conversely, a **Project role assignment** enforces a stricter security boundary, granting access only to specified projects (namespaces) within those clusters or cluster sets. This is best suited for application development teams operating in multi-tenant environments.

---

### Accessing Role Assignments in ACM

You can access and create role assignments in Red Hat Advanced Cluster Management through four different paths, depending on your current workflow and requirements. Start by navigating to **Fleet Management**, then choose the method that best fits your use case.

---

### Method 1: Creating Assignments via Identities

Use this method when you want to assign permissions to a specific user or group across different scopes or roles.

1. Expand the **User Management** menu and click **Identities**.
2. Select either the **Users** or **Groups** tab.
3. Click the name of the target user or group. Note: If the required identity does not exist, you must create it before proceeding.
4. Navigate to the **Role Assignments** tab and click **Create role assignment**. The creation modal opens with the selected user or group pre-filled.
5. Select a **Scope** to define the reach of the permissions: choose **Global access** (applies to all clusters and namespaces in the hub), **Select cluster set**, or **Select clusters**. Click **Next**.
6. Select the specific cluster sets or clusters if you did not choose Global access. Click **Next**.
7. Select the **Cluster granularity** or **Cluster set granularity**: choose **Cluster role assignment** or **Cluster set role assignment** to apply rights to all namespaces, or **Project role assignment** to limit rights to common projects. Click **Next**.
8. Select the target projects if you chose Project role assignment. You can also create new common projects from this screen by clicking **Create common project**. Click **Next**.
9. Select the role to apply to this identity. Click **Next**.
10. Review your configuration on the summary screen. Click **Create** to finalize the assignment.

---

### Method 2: Creating Assignments via Roles

Use this method when you want to take a specific role and apply it to various users or groups.

1. Expand the **User Management** menu and click **Roles**.
2. Click the name of the role you want to assign.
3. Navigate to the **Role Assignments** tab and click **Create role assignment**. The creation modal opens with the role pre-filled.
4. Select the **Identities** (Users or Groups) that will receive this role. Click **Next**.
5. Select a **Scope** to define the reach of the permissions: choose **Global access**, **Select cluster set**, or **Select clusters**. Click **Next**.
6. Select the specific cluster sets or clusters if prompted. Click **Next**.
7. Select the **Cluster granularity** or **Cluster set granularity**: choose **Cluster role assignment** or **Cluster set role assignment** to apply rights to all namespaces, or **Project role assignment** to limit rights to common projects. Click **Next**.
8. Select the target projects if you chose Project role assignment. Click **Next**.
9. Review your configuration on the summary screen. Click **Create** to finalize the assignment.

---

### Method 3: Creating Assignments via Clusters

Use this method when you are already viewing a specific cluster and want to manage who has access to it.

1. Navigate to your **Clusters** inventory.
2. Click the name of the target cluster.
3. Navigate to the **Role Assignments** tab and click **Create role assignment**. The creation modal opens with the cluster pre-filled.
4. Select the **Identities** (Users or Groups) that need access to this cluster. Click **Next**.
5. Select the **Cluster granularity**: choose **Cluster role assignment** (for all namespaces within this cluster) or **Project role assignment** (for specific projects). Click **Next**.
6. Select the target projects if you chose Project role assignment. Click **Next**.
7. Select the role to grant the identities. Click **Next**.
8. Review your configuration on the summary screen. Click **Create** to finalize the assignment.

---

### Method 4: Creating Assignments via Cluster Sets

Use this method when managing access across a predefined logical group of clusters.

1. Navigate to your **Cluster sets** inventory.
2. Click the name of the target cluster set.
3. Navigate to the **Role Assignments** tab and click **Create role assignment**. The creation modal opens with the cluster set pre-filled.
4. Select the **Identities** (Users or Groups) that need access to this cluster set. Click **Next**.
5. Select the **Cluster set granularity**: choose **Cluster set role assignment** (for all namespaces within the set) or **Project role assignment** (for specific projects). Click **Next**.
6. Select the target projects if you chose Project role assignment. Click **Next**.
7. Select the role to grant the identities. Click **Next**.
8. Review your configuration on the summary screen. Click **Create** to finalize the assignment.

[#fine-grain-rbac-ui]
= Assigning fine-grained role-based access control in the console

> Assign fine-grained virtualization roles to users and groups directly from the console. This allows you to grant specific permissions to manage virtual machinesat the cluster or namespace level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assign fine-grained virtualization roles to users and groups directly from the console. This allows you to grant specific permissions to manage virtual machines at the cluster or namespace level.
```

Reviewer: I would probably mention something like `at the cluster, cluster set or namespace level`

*Note:* Slide the *YAML* option on to see the data that you enter populate in the YAML editor.

> //do we still need this note?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: We do not need this. There is no yaml editor in the new UI.

- You need to install the latest version of {ocp-virt} on your hub cluster. For more information, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.20/html/virtualization/installing[Virtualization - Installing].
- To learn about {ocp-short} default and virtualization roles and permissions, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.20/html/virtualization/about#authorization_virt-security-policies[Authorization] in the {ocp-short} documentation.
- For details on how to enable role-based access control, see xref:../secure_clusters/rbac_implement_rhacm.adoc#rhacm-rbac-implement[Implementing role-based access control].

> //should we look at what we did for enable and use those?

Reviewer 2: Similar to comments left in https://github.com/stolostron/rhacm-docs/pull/8606/changes#diff-9a113c0e93c9d28b533c406d6e399e8d852c55ea3ec6f71d3e26f24ea0bed143. Can we keep this generic stuff in a common section like the into section? Seems like saying the same thing in multiple sections will make this doc harder to maintain.

Author: If the prerequisites apply to this file, we need to place them here because we cannot guarantee the user will read them in the intro. With search and Ai capability, it is important that this file can stand alone. 

Is enabling a prereq for this one? If it is, we can just point to that, which has the prereqs. @mshort55 ??

Reviewer 2: OK. Prerequisites do apply to both UI and CLI docs in the same exact ways. If it is better to have them mentioned in both, pls do so.

And yes, enabling is also a prerequisite for UI and CLI (same feature, same enablement applies).

- You need to install the latest version of {ocp-virt} on your hub cluster. For more information, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.20/html/virtualization/installing[Virtualization - Installing].
- To learn about {ocp-short} default and virtualization roles and permissions, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.20/html/virtualization/about#authorization_virt-security-policies[Authorization] in the {ocp-short} documentation.
- For details on how to enable role-based access control, see xref:../secure_clusters/rbac_implement_rhacm.adoc#rhacm-rbac-implement[Implementing role-based access control].
//should we look at what we did for enable and use those?

.Procedure

Complete the following steps to assign a role to a user or group:

1. From the navigation menu, select *Fleet management*.

> 2. Navigate to the *Identities* page by selecting *User management* > *Identities*.

Reviewer: this is also valid for, groups, roles, clusters and cluster sets (I mean, the Role Assignment (RA) creation wizard can be triggered from any of those identities).
I'm wondering whether it is worth to mention this. If so, please consider RA wizard changes based on the context (if Identities -> identities step won't be displayed, if roles -> roles step won't be displayed...)

3. Select the name of the user or group for which you want to assign permissions.
4. Select the *Role assignments* tab.
5. Click *Create role assignment*.
6. In the *Scope* field, select the scope of your role assignment.
+

> *Note:* If you select the *Cluster set* scope, you must also define the *Namespace* scope for the set of clusters to which the user or group has permissions.

Reviewer: Namespace selection has the same behavior either for cluster and cluster sets, and for neither of them is required

Reviewer 2: I would either remove this part, or you can also spin it into a positive:
"*Note:* If you select the *Cluster* or *Cluster set* scopes, you can also define the *Namespace* scope for the clusters to which the user or group has permissions."

Just for your reference, the only scope that does not allow namespace selection is Global scope. If you choose clusters or cluster sets as scope, you have the option to choose:
1. whole cluster/s
2. specific namespace/s

Author: Discussed at length in the meeting, we are rebuilding this to include all three options rather than sprinkling notes about the different views and options here.

7. In the *Role* field, select the role you want to assign to the user or group.
8. Click *Create* to save the role assignment.

The new role assignment appears in the *Role assignments* table. The permissions are applied to the selected user or group immediately.

> //lets confirm that the permissions are applied immediately, or if there is a delay.

Reviewer: as soon as the status is ready the permissions are already applied. Can you please confirm this @mshort55 @kurwang

Reviewer 3: I believe so the permissions get applied successfully by the controller if the status.conditon or status.roleassignments.status is successful

Reviewer 2: I think saying immediately is fine. The delay is so small it is insignificant.
